Docs for Great Expectations Airflow Provider (#1)
joshua-stauffer/airflow-provider-great-expectations: docs/getting-started.md

- If you want to [trigger actions](https://docs.greatexpectations.io/docs/core/trigger_actions_based_on_results/create_a_checkpoint_with_actions) based on validation results, use the `GXValidateCheckpointOperator`. This option supports all features of GX Core, so it requires the most configuration - you have to define a  Checkpoint, BatchDefinition, ExpectationSuite, and ValidationDefinition to get validation results.

The Operators vary in which [Data Contexts](https://docs.greatexpectations.io/docs/core/set_up_a_gx_environment/create_a_data_context) they support. All 3 Operators support Ephemeral and GX Cloud Data Contexts. Only the `GXValidateCheckpointOperator` supports the File Data Context.

- If the results are used only within the Airflow DAG by other tasks, we recommend using an Ephemeral Data Context. The serialized Validation Result will be available within the DAG as the task result, but will not persist externally for viewing the results across multiple runs. All 3 Operators support the Ephemeral Data Context.

> - To persist and view results outside of Airflow, we recommend using a Cloud Data Context. Validation Results are automatically visible in the GX Cloud UI when using a Cloud Data Context, and the task result contains a link to the stored validation result. All 3 Operators support the Cloud Data Context.

Author: **Note for reviewers** - re "All 3 Operators support the Cloud Data Context." this depends on work that is still pending in https://greatexpectations.atlassian.net/browse/GX-123. If for any reason that epic isn't completed before we're ready to release the new provider, we'll need to update the docs to show only the checkpoint operator supporting the cloud data context.

Reviewer: Thanks for bringing this up - the required GX Core work has merged as of `1.3.5`. i'll bump to the minimum required version later today. The follow up tasks on the cloud side do not block airflow users, so we're clear to release these docs as is without concern.

## Prerequisites

- [Python](https://www.python.org/) version 3.9 to 3.12
- [Great Expectations](https://docs.greatexpectations.io/docs/core/set_up_a_gx_environment/install_gx) version 1.3.3+
- [Apache Airflow®](https://airflow.apache.org/) version 2.1.0+ 

## Assumed knowledge

To get the most out of this getting started guide, make sure you have an understanding of:

- The basics of Great Expectations. See [Try GX Core](https://docs.greatexpectations.io/docs/core/introduction/try_gx/).
- Airflow fundamentals, such as writing DAGs and defining tasks. See [Get started with Apache Airflow](https://www.astronomer.io/docs/learn/get-started-with-airflow/).
- Airflow Operators. See [Operators 101](https://www.astronomer.io/docs/learn/what-is-an-operator/).
- Airflow connections. See [Managing your Connections in Apache Airflow](https://www.astronomer.io/docs/learn/connections/).

## Install the provider and dependencies

1. Install the provider.

   ```bash

>    pip install airflow-provider-great-expectations 

Author: **Note for reviewers**: When I talked with Pankaj, he showed me how to pull in code samples from snippets like the [DAG Factory docs](https://github.com/astronomer/dag-factory/blob/main/docs/getting-started/quick-start-astro-cli.md?plain=1#L34-L36) do. In the interest of time, I've inlined the code samples for now. If it is important for them to be pulled in through snippets, Astronomer can refactor this while adding the mkdocs functionality.

   ```
2. (Optional) Install additional dependencies for the data sources you’ll use. For example, to install the optional Snowflake dependency, use the following command.

   ```bash
   pip install "airflow-provider-great-expectations[snowflake]"
   ```
   The following backends are supported as optional dependencies:
      - `athena`
      - `azure`
      - `bigquery`
      - `gcp`
      - `mssql`
      - `postgresql`
      - `s3`
      - `snowflake`
      - `spark`

## Configure an Operator

After deciding [which Operator best fits your use case](#operator-use-cases), follow the Operator-specific instructions below to configure it.

> ### Data Frame Operator

Author: **Note for reviewers**  Ideally, the operator-specific instructions would be presented in [content tabs](https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/reference/content-tabs/#grouping-other-content). The three operator-specific H3s here would turn into the tab titles. Since the mkdocs functionality is not in place yet, I used separate h3 sections instead of content tabs for now

1. Import the Operator.

    ```python
    from great_expectations_provider.operators.validate_dataframe import (
        GXValidateDataFrameOperator,
    )
    ```

2. Instantiate the Operator with required and optional parameters.

    ```python

>     my_data_frame_validation = GXValidateDataFrameOperator(

Reviewer: nit on the variable naming - instantiating this class doesn't return a validation, it returns the Operator which can be run within a DAG to create the validation. Not a super strongly held opinion if you feel this is best, but just wanted to point out for clarity.

>     my_data_frame_validation = GXValidateDataFrameOperator(
>         task_id="my_data_frame_validation",
>         configure_dataframe=lambda: pd.read_csv(my_data_file),
>         expect=my_expectation_suite,
>     )

Reviewer: ```suggestion

    from typing import TYPE_CHECKING

    if TYPE_CHECKING:
        from pandas import DataFrame
    
    def configure_data_frame(): DataFrame:
        import pandas as pd  # airflow best practice is to not import heavy dependencies top level
        return pd.read_csv(my_data_file)
    
    my_data_frame_validation = GXValidateDataFrameOperator(
        task_id="my_data_frame_validation",
        configure_dataframe=configure_data_frame,
        expect=my_expectation_suite,
    )
```

Reviewer: it's a bit strange to me that these code examples are indented 4 spaces, since that isn't valid python. I'm not sure what the formatting will ultimately look like, but if possible, would recommend that they be runnable after copy/paste

Reviewer: the update here is twofold:
- we should follow airflow best practices of not importing large/expensive dependencies in the top level namespace
- named functions are generally preferable to lambdas, unless there's a strong reason for them

Author: > it's a bit strange to me that these code examples are indented 4 spaces, since that isn't valid python. I'm not sure what the formatting will ultimately look like, but if possible, would recommend that they be runnable after copy/paste

Hmmm, I got the in-code indents from [great_expectations_provider/example_dags/example_great_expectations_dag.py](https://github.com/joshua-stauffer/airflow-provider-great-expectations/blob/v1_gx_provider/great_expectations_provider/example_dags/example_great_expectations_dag.py#L134). Should the indenting in the example dag be changed?
<img width="937" alt="Screenshot 2025-02-05 at 12 48 10 PM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/05dd6d6a-c0c6-47c4-9585-cd089a062d59" />

The whole code block is indented in the markdown so that it renders as nested under the associated numbered step. Here's a [preview](https://github.com/klavavej/airflow-provider-great-expectations/blob/docs/docs/getting-started.md#data-frame-operator) of how the markdown renders

<img width="1114" alt="Screenshot 2025-02-05 at 12 54 19 PM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/6b0acc44-35aa-4535-bea8-6b3fb7b014fe" />

Author: > the update here is twofold:
> 
> we should follow airflow best practices of not importing large/expensive dependencies in the top level namespace
> named functions are generally preferable to lambdas, unless there's a strong reason for them

Should these changes be made in the [example dag](https://github.com/joshua-stauffer/airflow-provider-great-expectations/blob/v1_gx_provider/great_expectations_provider/example_dags/example_great_expectations_dag.py#L134-L138) too?

    ```

>     - **`task_id`**: alphanumeric display name for the task in the Airflow UI.

Reviewer: it may be worth mentioning that this name will also be used by the operator to name GX resources. It's not really relevant for ephemeral users, since they will never see the GX components backing the validation, but it _is_ relevant for cloud users.

    - **`context_type` (optional)**: accepts `ephemeral` or `cloud` to set the [Data Context](https://docs.greatexpectations.io/docs/core/set_up_a_gx_environment/create_a_data_context) used by the Operator. Defaults to `ephemeral`, which does not persist results between runs. To save and view Validation Results in GX Cloud, use `cloud` and complete the additional Cloud Data Context configuration below.

    For more details, explore this [end-to-end code sample](https://github.com/klavavej/airflow-provider-great-expectations/tree/docs/great_expectations_provider/example_dags/example_great_expectations_dag.py#L134-L138).
    
3. If you use a Cloud Data Context, create a [free GX Cloud account](https://app.greatexpectations.io/) to get your [Cloud credentials](https://docs.greatexpectations.io/docs/cloud/connect/connect_python#get-your-user-access-token-and-organization-id) and then set the following Airflow variables.

    - `GX_CLOUD_ACCESS_TOKEN`
    - `GX_CLOUD_ORGANIZATION_ID`

### Batch Operator

1. Import the Operator.

    ```python
    from great_expectations_provider.operators.validate_batch import (
        GXValidateBatchOperator,
    )

>     ```

Author: **Note for reviewers**: In the [README](https://github.com/joshua-stauffer/airflow-provider-great-expectations/tree/v1_gx_provider), the batch operator had a slightly different format for the import than the other two operators

```
from great_expectations_provider.operators.validate_dataframe import (
    GXValidateDataFrameOperator,
)
```

```
from great_expectations_provider.operators.validate_batch import GXValidateBatchOperator
```

```
from great_expectations_provider.operators.validate_checkpoint import (
    GXValidateCheckpointOperator,
)
```

I added parentheses and line breaks to the batch operator import for consistency. Please double check the accuracy of the revised import.

Reviewer: that's fine - this was copy/pasted from our linted code, so the format in the original README is the one preferred by the linter. But since this is text and not code, it won't complain, and i'm not opinionated either way.

2. Instantiate the Operator with required and optional parameters.

    ```python

>     my_batch_validation = GXValidateBatchOperator(

Reviewer: same comment as [here](https://github.com/joshua-stauffer/airflow-provider-great-expectations/pull/1/files#r1943190687)

        task_id="my_batch_validation",

>         configure_batch_definition=my_batch_definition,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        configure_batch_definition=configure_batch_definition,
```

note that this requires a function which returns a batch definition, not a batch definition itself. it's referenced correctly below, but naming the function `my_batch_definition` could be confusing.

Author: I'll make a similar change for `configure_checkpoint=my_checkpoint`

        expect=my_expectation_suite,
    )
    ```

>     - **`task_id`**: alphanumeric display name for the task in the Airflow UI.

Reviewer: likewise, it may be worth mentioning that this name will also be used by the operator to name GX resources. It's not really relevant for ephemeral users, since they will never see the GX components backing the validation, but it _is_ relevant for cloud users.

    For more details, explore this [end-to-end code sample](https://github.com/klavavej/airflow-provider-great-expectations/tree/docs/great_expectations_provider/example_dags/example_dag_with_batch_parameters.py#L123-L127).
    
3. If you use a Cloud Data Context, create a [free GX Cloud account](https://app.greatexpectations.io/) to get your [Cloud credentials](https://docs.greatexpectations.io/docs/cloud/connect/connect_python#get-your-user-access-token-and-organization-id) and then set the following Airflow variables.

    - `GX_CLOUD_ACCESS_TOKEN`
    - `GX_CLOUD_ORGANIZATION_ID`

### Checkpoint Operator

1. Import the Operator.

    ```python
    from great_expectations_provider.operators.validate_checkpoint import (
        GXValidateCheckpointOperator,
    )
    ```

2. Instantiate the Operator with required and optional parameters.

    ```python

>     my_checkpoint_validation = GXValidateCheckpointOperator(

Reviewer: same comment as [here](https://github.com/joshua-stauffer/airflow-provider-great-expectations/pull/1/files#r1943190687)

        task_id="my_checkpoint_validation",
        configure_checkpoint=my_checkpoint,
    )
    ```

    - **`task_id`**: alphanumeric display name for the task in the Airflow UI.
    - **`configure_checkpoint`**: function that returns a [Checkpoint](https://docs.greatexpectations.io/docs/core/trigger_actions_based_on_results/create_a_checkpoint_with_actions), which orchestrates a ValidationDefinition, BatchDefinition, and ExpectationSuite. The Checkpoint can also specify a Result Format and trigger actions based on Validation Results.
    - **`batch_parameters` (optional)**: dictionary that specifies a [time-based Batch of data](https://docs.greatexpectations.io/docs/core/define_expectations/retrieve_a_batch_of_test_data) to validate your Expectations against. Defaults to the first valid Batch found, which is the most recent Batch (with default sort ascending) or the oldest Batch if the Batch Definition has been configured to sort descending.

>     - **`context_type` (optional)**: accepts `ephemeral`, `cloud`, or `file` to set the [Data Context](https://docs.greatexpectations.io/docs/core/set_up_a_gx_environment/create_a_data_context) used by the Operator. Defaults to `ephemeral`, which does not persist results between runs. To save and view Validation Results in GX Cloud, use `cloud` and complete the additional Cloud Data Context configuration below. To manage Validation Results yourself, use `file` and complete the additional File Data Context configuration below.

Author: **Note for reviewer** I understand that `configure_file_data_context` takes precedence over `context_type` and that if you pass in `configure_file_data_context` the `context_type` parameter becomes irrelevant. But I think the docs and user experience are more clear if we pretend like you have to set `context_type` to `file` AND pass `configure_file_data_context` to use a File Data Context. let me know if you have concerns about this.

Reviewer: i think that's great, thanks 🙇
